Bioinformatics University Specialist (UPV/EHU, 2015-2016)
=========================================================

Introduction
------------

Bioinformatics is the area that provides informatics tools to analyse the “Big Data” generated by advanced molecular techniques. A competent bioinformatician trully understands the biological nature of the problems derived from the current “Data tsunami” and has the technical skills to develop solutions (software, infrastructures, etc.). This University Specialist degree will provide students with such skills and hence will make them able to develop bioinformatics-based technical solutions in academia or companies.

Programme
---------

In order for a student to be awarded the degree, 30 ECTSa credits must be completed: 22 taught credits and a 8 credits research/development project including a dissertation. 1 ECTS is equivalent to a student working 30 hours. In this context that means 10 tuition hours (Theory and/or lab practical work) and 20 homework hours.

Both Life Sciences oriented and Computer Science oriented students will be accepted, and specific tuition will be provided by dividing the first semester into two paths: Life Sciences (for computer scientists) and Computer Science (For life scientists). In the second semester, one of the optional modules must be chosen: an optional module represents a concrete application of Bioinformatics.

### October – February

1(A).- Cell, genome, genes; Evolution and Genetics (Compulsory, life sciences path, 3 ECTS). [Andone Estonba/Iratxe Zarraonaindia/Amets Saenz]

1(B).- Programming and Data Bases (Compulsory, computer science path, 3 ECTS).
* Bioinformatics programming in Perl: regular expressions and file parsing, Perl libraries for bioinformatics. [Mark Wilkinson] (1 ECTS)
* Introduction to computational complexity and R language. [Igor Santos] (1 ECTS)
* Object Oriented Programming with Python. [Javier Nieves] (1 ECTS)
* Databases: managing and using relational databases, introduction to NoSQL databases. [Javier Nieves] (1 ECTS)

2.- Advanced computing (Compulsory, both paths, 6 ECTS).
* Introduction to Data mining and Heuristic Optimization: principal techniques and bioinformatics applications [Iñaki Inza] (2 ECTS)
* UNIX: basic system administration (users, processes, file system), shell and shell scripting, implementation of UNIX pipelines and scheduled tasks. [Mikel Egaña](1 ECTS)
* High Performance Computing: Infrastructures. Algorithms [Alex Mendiburu] (1 ECTS)
* Web technologies: Web servers, Web APIs and mash-ups, Web services, Life Sciences Semantic Web and ontologies. [Mark Wilkinson] (2 ECTS)

### February - May

4.- Applied bioinformatics (Compulsory, both paths, 6 credits).
* Sequence analysis: sequence alignment, main databases and data formats. [Mikel Egaña] (1 ECTS)
* Molecular phylogeny. [Iratxe Zarraonaindia] (1 ECTS)
* Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) data analysis. [Marcos Arauzo] (1 ECTS)
* Gene expression microarrays: preprocess, differential expression and classification with R-Bioconductor [I. Inza] (1 ECTS)
* Research methods in bioinformatics. [Alberto Labarga] (1 ECTS)
* Entrepreneurship in bioinformatics. [Alberto Labarga] (1 ECTS)

5.- Bioinformatics applied to biomedicine (Optional, both paths, 6 credits).
* Epigenetic data analysis [B. Calvo] (1 ECTS)
*Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS) in humans [José A. Lozano] (1 ECTS)
* Translational bioinformatics. [Alberto Labarga] (1 ECTS)

6.- Bioinformatics applied to environment, populations, and non-model organisms (Optional, both paths, 6 credits).
* Metagenomics. [Aitor Albaina]
* Population genetics in non-model organisms (SNPs, ...). [Iratxe Zarraonaindia]
* Comparative genomics. [Iratxe Zarraonaindia]
* Functional annotation of genomes. [Iratxe Zarraonaindia]

### May - September

The project is (in the most part) related to the optional module undertaken by the student, and will probably include a placement in a partner institution (company or academia). The project is small, very focused and with a moderate technical difficulty, preferably touching upon content of various compulsory modules. The outcome will be a dissertation and an oral presentation sumarising it.

Two types of projects are available:

* Research project: it focuses on answering a scientific question and the candidate will exploit bioinformatics as a means to obtain such answer. The project will be assesed in terms of how different technologies were combined and the merit of the scientific answer. The dissertation will be produced as a scientific paper.

* Development project: it focuses on the the technical aspect of bioinformatics, and the candidate will develop a program or system to achieve an specific aim. The project will be assesed technically, thus the performance, overall design, implementation skills, etc. will be taken into account, rather than the scientific result. The dissertation will be produced as a technical report.

Web
---

* http://bioinformatika.info
* http://bioinformatika.eus
* http://github.com/mikel-egana-aranguren/EHU-MSc-Bioinformatics/ (Private repository with wiki, doc and web files)

Staff
-----

This degree is coordinated by members of Genomic Resources Group, UPV/EHU (http://www.genomic-resources.eu/):

* Director: Andone Estonba ().
* Scientific director: Mikel Egaña Aranguren (mikel.egana@ehu.es).
* Scientific director: Iratxe Zarraonaindia ().
